# Tree Equity in Oakland, California
## Research Question
We are interested in identifying the distribution of trees and resulting shade coverage/heat island effects in Oakland, CA based on City of Oakland tree location datasets cross-referenced with data from the American Community Survey. Our goal is to determine whether income, ethnicity and other variables available through the census are linked to urban forest distribution and municipal/state investment. Does the streetscape quality of life for communities change based on neighborhood demographics? How can physical infrastructure, or a lack thereof, affect the community?
## Stakes
We are concerned with inequity in the distribution of trees in Oakland because, [as a recent L.A. Times article makes clear](https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2021-10-28/extreme-heat-built-environment-equity), historically underserved neighborhoods often suffer when there aren’t enough trees to blunt the impact of extreme heat. As the planet warms, these effects will only become more pronounced. In addition to the heat-related benefits, trees aid air quality, absorb noise, produce vibrant ecosystems, and just generally make neighborhoods feel more pleasant and livable. In short, the quantity of trees in our neighborhoods directly impacts the quality of our lives, and so we should be concerned with whether the benefits are equally enjoyed, no matter the facts of their lives.
## Spatial Scope
Our spatial scope will include the City of Oakland. The municipal boundary will define our project area, as the datasets we are working with from the city may not provide information outside of the municipal boundaries. We will also be looking at census tracts and areas defined by the US Census or ACS. These areas are important because they offer the basis for our spatial demographic analysis. 
## Data Sources
In order to conduct our analysis, we’ll be bringing in data from two separate sources, both with geographical variables. First, we will bring in data from the 2019 American Community Survey for census tracts in Alameda County. The dataset will include information on the racial demographics of each census tract as well as the distribution of incomes. We will need to trim the dataset to eliminate census tracts in Alameda County that are outside of the City of Oakland.
Once we’ve gathered this data, we will overlay the City of Oakland’s Trees Sidewalk Raw dataset. This dataset, which is available in a shape file, assigns locations with points instead of latitudes and longitudes, which will require some work to fit into the Folium framework we’ve been taught so far.
## Expected Outputs
Overlaying tree locations with shade buffers onto census tracts will hopefully provide enough of an estimate for the amount of tree-provided shade a neighborhood is getting. We also plan on using temperature data in order to analyze which census tracts are experiencing heat island effects, then overlaying tree locations to see if any conclusions can be drawn. Additional visualizations will be used to display race/income demographics and tree location density.
## Expected Insights
After we’ve conducted this analysis, we expect to find greater tree density in the wealthier, whiter neighborhoods of Oakland (North Oakland, broadly, as well as in the hills) and fewer trees in the neighborhoods that are historically poorer and/or Black and Latinx (west Oakland, the flats of deep east Oakland). Extrapolating from these (expected) findings, we believe we will be able to confidently argue that significant inequities exist in the distribution of street trees across the city of Oakland, and that these inequities ought to be rectified.
